Central Sector Scheme of Scholarship for College & University
Students
Scheme Details
The Ministry of Human Resource Development, Department of Higher Education,
Government of India has been implementing a Scholarship scheme titled “Central Sector
Scheme of Scholarship for College and University Students”, from the financial year 2008-09
to enable meritorious students pursue higher education. 78 Nos. of Scholarships under this
scheme have been ear-marked for the students of the U.T of Puducherry who are above
80th percentile of successful candidates in the relevant stream for a particular Board of
Examination, in class XII of 10+2 pattern or equivalent conducted by State
Board/CBSE/ICSE.
The scholarship will be given @ Rs.1000/- per month at Graduation level for first three years
of College and University courses and Rs.2000/- per month at Post Graduation level.
Students pursuing professional courses would get Rs.2000/- per month in the 4th and 5th
year. The scholarship would be paid for 10 months in an academic year.
The award of scholarship shall be subject to the following conditions:
Eligibility for Fresh scholarship
1. The scholarship shall be awarded to the Indian nationals only and residents of the U.T. of
Puducherry.
2. The students must be pursuing the Under graduate/Post graduate/Professional course in
a recognized College/Institution in India.
3. Students who are above 80th percentile of successful candidates in the relevant
stream for a particular Board of Examination, in class XII of 10+2 pattern or equivalent
during March 2016.
4. The students should belong to non-creamy layer as defined by the Department of
Personnel and Training in their Notification No.36012/22/93-Estt.(SCT), dated 08.11.1993
and as modified vide their OM No.36033/3/2004-Estt.(Res) dated 09.03.2004 and as may be
further modified from time to time.
5. The reservation would be applicable in terms of Central Reservation Policy and internal
ear-marking. (OBC – 27%, SC – 15 %, ST. – 7 ½ % and PH – 3 %)
6. The scholarship will be distributed amongst Pass outs of the Science, Commerce and
Humanities Streams in the ratio of 3:2:1 with equal number among boys and girls.
7. The applicant should not be availing any other scholarship from any other scheme/
source. (Those students who are covered under the Perunthalaivar Kamarajar Financial
Assistance Scheme (PKFA) and the students of Govt. Engineering and Medical
Colleges who are exempt from paying tuition fees under PKFA scheme are ineligible for
CSS scholarship).
8. The annual parental income of the students should not exceed Rs.6 Lakhs per annum.
II. Eligibility for Renewal of Scholarship:
1. Applicant should have passed Class XII of 10+2 pattern or equivalent from State
Board/CBSE/ICSE in the previous years (2012/2013/2014/2015) and should have been
awarded Central Sector Scholarship (fresh) by the Directorate of Higher and Technical
Education.
2. Applicant should not be availing any other scholarship from any other scheme/source.
3. Applicant should have passed in all the subjects with not less than 60 % marks (or
equivalent, if grades have been awarded) in the annual examinations (or aggregate of 2
semester) in the course pursuing.
4. Applicant should have maintained not less than 75 % attendance, good discipline and
should not have involved in ragging activities.
How to apply:
From the year 2015-16, the Central Scheme of Scholarship for College and University
students has been linked to the National e-Scholarship Portal. Scholarships commencing
from the academic year 2015-16 have been disbursed through the portal. Students may
refer to the link given below for further details:
http://scholarships.gov.in/
Note: Aadhar has been made mandatory for availing Government
Subsidies / Scholarships
From the financial year 2016-17 onwards, Aadhar has been made mandatory for availing
Government Subsidies / Scholarships which would directly be disbursed into the
beneficiaries’ bank account which has been seeded with the Aadhar Number.
In light of the above, all the students who are availing scholarships or wish to apply for the
same under “Central Sector Scheme of Scholarships for College and University Students”
should obtain their Aadhar number, if not already done, and have it seeded with their bank
account for uninterrupted disbursal of scholarship to their bank account. For applying for
online / offline Aadhar Card, please visit the URL
http://www.aadharcarduidai.in/aadhar-card-apply-online-offline/
